Abstract
This paper investigates business regulations-economic growth nexus in 162 countries over the period 2007-2011. It uses ten indicators of Doing Business and a set of control variables. The results provide a robust link between regulation indices and economic growth except Trading Across Borders and Dealing with Construction Permits indices. Regulation indices and control variables don't matter in term of growth induction in Africa. This finding suggests some policy conclusions that can help poor nations to grow faster.

Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Doing BusinessEconomic GrowthEconomic PoliciesInstrumental ApproachRegulations
1. Introduction
In the current economic climate, growth remains a key government priority. The literature on economic growth has turned to the effects of country's political, legal, economic and social institutions on wealth and long-term growth (Acemoglu et al. (Acemoglu et al., 2001, Acemoglu et al., November 2002), Dollar and Kraay (Dollar & Kraay, 2003), Easterly and Levine (Easterly & Levine, 1997), Hall and Jones (Hall Robert & Jones Charles, 1999), Knack and Keefer (Knack & Keefer, 1995), Mauro (Mauro, 1995), Rodrik et al. (R, A, & Trebbi, 2002), and many others). It is obvious that countries with better institutions grow faster. However, as noted by Rodrik et al. (Hanusch, 30 June 2011), it is difficult to identify which institutions matter and how does one acquire them. This is a question of some practical importance. In recent years, the proliferation of datasets aiming to measure a wide gamut of institutional reforms allowed economists to make progress in this area. In this context, the World Bank has been publishing a series of annual Doing Business reports since 2004 investigating regulations that enhance business activity and those that constrain it. As a result, articles focusing on the effect of business regulations on economic growth appeared (Djankov et al. (Djankov, McLiesh, & Ramalhom, 2006), Haider (Haidar, 2012), Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) and Loayza et al. (Loayza and Oviedo, 2004, Loayza et al., 2005)).
The objective of this paper is to contribute to the existing literature. In line with earlier studies, our paper takes a close look at how robust is the relationship between business regulations and economic growth, but with some differences. First, the data are drawn for a more recent time period. Second, Haider (Haidar, 2012) and Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) included a set of regional dummy variables, whereas this paper includes only the African dummy because the results from the empirical growth literature systematically show Africa with the largest unexplained growth underperformance. Therefore, it is interesting to focus on this region. Second, the choice of control variables is generally based on Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006), Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) and Loayza et al. (Loayza and Oviedo, 2004, Loayza et al., 2005), but with view. While authors focused on governance among the determining factor of growth, especially Loayza et al. (Loayza and Oviedo, 2004, Loayza et al., 2005), this paper differs in concentrating on financial development rather than wider governance issues, which enrich the analysis. Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006) and Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) used an instrumental variable approach and OLS regressions to test the robustness of their results. The results generally uphold. However, from an econometric point of view, the OLS estimator is biased and inconsistent due to endogeneity of business regulations indicators, so we only use two-stage least regressions. Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) explored his result by dividing the sample in two groups: poor countries and rich countries. Unfortunately, in our context, this will lead to a steep decline in the number of observations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews literature. Section III describes the dataset and the empirical strategy. Section IV assesses the effect of business regulations on economic growth. Section V concludes the paper and draws implications for sustainable economic policies.
2. Literature review
Numerous potential growth determinants have been identified over the years. Over the last decade, a body of literature has explored the relationship between business regulations and economic performance.
A number of studies does not deal with the effect of business regulation on economic growth directly but instead focuses on the effect of business regulation on one of the growth drivers (labour productivity, investment, innovation, total factor productivity). Busse and Groizard (Busse & Groizard, 2008) for example use a standard cross-country growth regression with regulation interacted with FDI inflows and other control variables. Regulation is measured by five components of the World Bank Doing Business Indicators. They find that FDI does not stimulate growth in economies with excessive business and labour regulations.
In a sample of more than 26,000 manufacturing establishments across 71 countries (both OECD and developing), Dutz et al. (Dutz, Kessides, O'Connell, & Willig, 2011) find that the aggregate Doing Business indicator, as well as its sub-indexes, are positively correlated with product and process innovation for young firms in non-OECD countries. These findings stress the importance of business environment in stimulating incentives for competition and innovation.
Using a panel of micro-data on firms from the European Union between 2002 and 2008, Dall'Olio et al. (Dall'Olio, Iootty, Kanehira, & Saliola, 2013) investigate whether structural or firm-specific characteristics contributed more to labor productivity growth. Results show that improvements in the Doing Business indicators are positively correlated with increased labor productivity in manufacturing and services in EU-15 and EU-12 countries, though the magnitude of this association is larger in EU-12 countries.
Other studies supply more insight on direct links between business regulation and growth. Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006) for example investigate the impact of business regulations on growth in 135 countries during 1993- 2002. They find that business regulations index and growth are consistently and positively correlated. Countries with less burdensome business regulations grow faster. The authors examine the magnitude by including dummies for each quartile of the business regulation index in the OLS regressions. The result shows that improving from the worst (first) to the best (fourth) quartile of business regulations implies a 2.3 percentage point increase in average annual growth. The main result remains robust after the inclusion of commonly used measures of institutional quality from International Country Risk Guide and Transparency International.
Also, Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) discuss the potential role of the Doing Business indicators in the reform process. The choice of control variables is generally based on Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006), yet the data are drawn for a more recent time period, from 2003 to 2009, and a number of additional variables are used. Author reports results for five-year and 10-year average growth respectively. Data availability restricts the sample size to 175 countries. The evidence shows that focusing on indicators relating to credit and the enforcement of contracts is the most important. Indicators related to cost have the largest potential for fostering growth. Unlike Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006), the analysis is also made for poor countries and rich countries separately (the sample was divided on median log GDP per capita). The doing business indicator coefficient is significant for only the developing country sample, both for 5-year and 10-year growth. The effect remains when removing the regional dummies.
In the same order of ideas, Loayza et al. (Loayza & Oviedo, 2004) focus on two key measures of macroeconomic performance, namely the growth and volatility of real GDP. The sample covers 76 countries. The authors interact the regulation index with a governance proxy. In general, regulation tends to reduce growth. In most instances, better institutions help mitigate, and even eliminate, the adverse impact of regulation on macroeconomic performance.
Using a large sample of industrial and developing countries, Loayza et al. (Loayza et al., 2005) suggest that a heavier regulatory burden reduces growth and increase the size of the informal sector. The negative effects of excessive regulation are aggravated in countries with poor governance.
On a related issue, Dawson (Dawson & Regulation, 2006) estimates both "direct" and "indirect" effects of business regulation on growth. The estimates of the indirect effect show that the index of business regulation is statistically significant and positively related to growth. This result suggests that countries with less business regulation experience higher long-run growth rates as a result of higher total factor productivity. For example, a one standard deviation above the mean increase in the business regulation index is a 9 percentage point increase in 20-year growth rates for a sample of 64 countries. The estimates of the indirect effect reveal that business regulations are statistically significant and negatively related to growth. The estimated impact on growth from business regulation is 16 percentage points over the 20-year sample period.
Unlike Djankov et al. (Djankov et al., 2006), Hanusch (Hanusch, 30 June 2011) and Loayza et al. (Loayza and Oviedo, 2004, Loayza et al., 2005), Castro et al. (Castro, Clementi, & MacDonald, 2004) consider a specific aspect of business regulation: investor protection, which is introduced in the familiar two-period OLG model of capital accumulation. The theoretical result is that the positive effect of investor protection on growth is stronger for countries with lower restrictions on capital flows. Castro et al. (Castro et al., 2004) conduct a statistical analysis of cross-sectional data on growth, investor protection, and openness, and then explore the development experiences of South Korea and India. They find that the data provides some support for their prediction.
Also, Haidar (Haidar, 2009) looks at how the state of investors protections affects income level and growth in 170 countries over the period 1980-2004. The data is based on the investor protections index of doing business. It measures the strength of minority shareholder protections against directors' misuse of corporate assets for personal gain. Results show that the level of investor protection matters for cross-country differences in GDP growth: countries with stronger protections tend to grow faster than those with poor investor protections.
In a recent study, Haider (Haidar, 2012) investigates the connection between investor protection - among 9 other business regulatory reforms - and economic growth rates in 172 countries over the period 2006-2010. A five-year dataset on business regulatory reforms from the World Bank's Doing Business reports as well as variables that capture macroeconomic dynamics are used. In contrast to previous studies, the main independent variable, Reform, is defined as the total number of reforms happening in a country during a certain period of time (2006-2010 and 2006-2008). Each individual reform is coded as a dummy variable equal to 1 if a positive reform occurred in one or more of the 10 indicators in a given year and 0 otherwise. The key empirical finding is that business regulatory reforms are good for economic growth: on average, each business regulatory reform is associated with a 0.15% increase in growth rate of GDP. The author indicates that reforms, which improved business and investment climate, may have helped to mitigate the effects of the 2008 global slump in economic growth. Countries with more business regulatory reforms enjoyed higher economic growth rates1.
3. Data description and Methods
As is standard in the literature, economic growth is measured as the average annual rate of per capita real GDP growth2. We use growth in real PPP-adjusted per-capita income from 2007 to 2011 because it more captures the standard of living across different countries and is not subject to large re-orderings in rank as a result of exchange rate fluctuations.
We use the World Bank Doing Business indicators (World, 2014) as measures of business regulations. The relative importance of Business regulatory indicators may not be contested. For example, they help governments gauge the 'health' of their regulatory regime through country benchmarking. They try to inform the design of reforms that will give the largest gains on the overall ranking because indicators are backed by an extensive description of regulations3.
The "Doing Business" dataset provides 9 sets of indicators and their constituent components covering all stages of a business's life cycle: from its incorporation through its operation, to its closure (Table 1). These are combined into an overall "ease of doing business" ranking. Economies are ranked on their ease of doing business, from 1-183. A high ranking on the ease of doing business index means the regulatory environment is more conducive to the starting and operation of a local firm. We take the simple average of country rankings in each of the ten topics in the database. We then normalize this index to vary between zero and one according to the formula:Ri - Rmin/Rmax - Rmin, for ranking R and country i. Higher value indicate heavier regulation regulatory burden4.




History
Distillation of kerosene and naphtha
The refining of crude petroleum owes its origin to the successful drilling of the first oil wells in Ontario, Canada, in 1858 and in Titusville, Pennsylvania, U.S., in 1859. Prior to that time, petroleum was available only in very small quantities from natural seepage of subsurface oil in various areas throughout the world. However, such limited availability restricted the uses for petroleum to medicinal and specialty purposes. With the discovery of “rock oil” in northwestern Pennsylvania, crude oil became available in sufficient quantity to inspire the development of larger-scale processing systems. The earliest refineries employed simple distillation units, or “stills,” to separate the various constituents of petroleum by heating the crude oil mixture in a vessel and condensing the resultant vapours into liquid fractions. Initially the primary product was kerosene, which proved to be a more abundant, cleaner-burning lamp oil of more consistent quality than whale oil or animal fat.

The lowest-boiling raw product from the still was “straight run” naphtha, a forerunner of unfinished gasoline (petrol). Its initial commercial application was primarily as a solvent. Higher-boiling materials were found to be effective as lubricants and fuel oils, but they were largely novelties at first.

The perfection of oil-drilling techniques quickly spread to Russia, and by 1890 refineries there were producing large quantities of kerosene and fuel oils. The development of the internal-combustion engine in the later years of the 19th century created a small market for crude naphtha. But the development of the automobile at the turn of the century sharply increased the demand for quality gasoline, and this finally provided a home for the petroleum fractions that were too volatile to be included in kerosene. As demand for automotive fuel rose, methods for continuous distillation of crude oil were developed.

Conversion to light fuels
After 1910 the demand for automotive fuel began to outstrip the market requirements for kerosene, and refiners were pressed to develop new technologies to increase gasoline yields. The earliest process, called thermal cracking, consisted of heating heavier oils (for which there was a low market requirement) in pressurized reactors and thereby cracking, or splitting, their large molecules into the smaller ones that form the lighter, more valuable fractions such as gasoline, kerosene, and light industrial fuels. Gasoline manufactured by the cracking process performed better in automobile engines than gasoline derived from straight distillation of crude petroleum. The development of more powerful airplane engines in the late 1930s gave rise to a need to increase the combustion characteristics of gasoline and spurred the development of lead-based fuel additives to improve engine performance.

During the 1930s and World War II, sophisticated refining processes involving the use of catalysts led to further improvements in the quality of transportation fuels and further increased their supply. These improved processes—including catalytic cracking of heavy oils, alkylation, polymerization, and isomerization—enabled the petroleum industry to meet the demands of high-performance combat aircraft and, after the war, to supply increasing quantities of transportation fuels.

The 1950s and ’60s brought a large-scale demand for jet fuel and high-quality lubricating oils. The continuing increase in demand for petroleum products also heightened the need to process a wider variety of crude oils into high-quality products. Catalytic reforming of naphtha replaced the earlier thermal reforming process and became the leading process for upgrading fuel qualities to meet the needs of higher-compression engines. Hydrocracking, a catalytic cracking process conducted in the presence of hydrogen, was developed to be a versatile manufacturing process for increasing the yields of either gasoline or jet fuels.

Explore Britannica Premium!
Go beyond the basics with trusted, in-depth knowledge for professionals, students, and lifelong learners.

Penguin, ship, mountain, atlasshohei ohtani, plants, andy wharhol art
Environmental concerns
By 1970 the petroleum-refining industry had become well established throughout the world. Delivery of crude oil to be refined into petroleum products had reached almost 2.3 billion tons per year (40 million barrels per day), with major concentrations of refineries in most developed countries. As the world became aware of the impact of industrial pollution on the environment, however, the petroleum-refining industry was a primary focus for change. Refiners added hydrotreating units to extract sulfur compounds from their products and began to generate large quantities of elemental sulfur. Effluent water and atmospheric emission of hydrocarbons and combustion products also became a focus of increased technical attention. In addition, many refined products came under scrutiny. Beginning in the mid-1970s, petroleum refiners in the United States and then around the world were required to develop techniques for manufacturing high-quality gasoline without employing lead additives, and beginning in the 1990s they were required to take on substantial investments in the complete reformulation of transportation fuels in order to minimize environmental emissions. From an industry that at one time produced a single product (kerosene) and disposed of unwanted by-product materials in any manner possible, petroleum refining has become one of the world’s most stringently regulated manufacturing industries, expending a major portion of its resources on reducing its impact on the environment as it processes some 4.6 billion tons of crude oil per year (roughly 80 million barrels per day).

Related Topics: sweetening desulfurization superfractionation petroleum refinery blending
Raw materials
Hydrocarbon chemistry
Petroleum crude oils are complex mixtures of hydrocarbons, chemical compounds composed only of carbon (C) and hydrogen (H).

Saturated molecules
The simplest of the hydrocarbon molecules is methane (CH4), which has one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms per molecule. The next simplest, ethane (C2H6), has two carbon atoms and six hydrogen atoms. A whole class of hydrocarbons can be defined by expanding upon the relationship between methane and ethane. Known as the paraffins, this is a family of chainlike molecules with the chemical formula CnH2n + 2. These molecules are also referred to as saturated, since each of the four valence electrons on a carbon atom that are available for bonding is taken up by a single hydrogen or carbon atom. Because these “single” bonds leave no valence electron available for sharing with another atom, paraffin molecules tend to be chemically stable.

structures of common hydrocarbon compounds
structures of common hydrocarbon compoundsStructures assumed by hydrogen (H) and carbon (C) molecules in four common hydrocarbon compounds.
Paraffins can be arranged either in straight chains (normal paraffins, such as butane; see figure) or branched chains (isoparaffins). Most of the paraffin compounds in naturally occurring crude oils are normal paraffins, while isoparaffins are frequently produced in refinery processes. The normal paraffins are uniquely poor as motor fuels, while isoparaffins have good engine-combustion characteristics. Longer-chain paraffins are major constituents of waxes.

Once a hydrocarbon molecule contains more than four carbon atoms, the carbon atoms may form not a branched or straight chain but a closed-ring structure known as a cyclo-compound. Saturated cyclo-compounds are called naphthenes. Naphthenic crudes tend to be poor raw materials for lubricant manufacture, but they are more easily converted into high-quality gasolines than are the paraffin compounds.

Unsaturated molecules
Two other chemical families that are important in petroleum refining are composed of unsaturated molecules. In unsaturated molecules, not all the valence electrons on a carbon atom are bonded to separate carbon or hydrogen atoms; instead, two or three electrons may be taken up by one neighbouring carbon atom, thus forming a “double” or “triple” carbon-carbon bond. Like saturated compounds, unsaturated compounds can form either chain or ring molecules. Unsaturated chain molecules are known as olefins. Only small amounts of olefins are found in crude oils, but large volumes are produced in refining processes. Olefins are relatively reactive as chemicals and can be readily combined to form other longer-chain compounds.

The other family of unsaturated compounds is made up of ring molecules called aromatics. The simplest aromatic compound, benzene (C6H6), has double bonds linking every other carbon molecule (see figure). The double bonds in the benzene ring are very unstable and chemically reactive. Partly for this reason, benzene is a popular building block in the petrochemical industry.

Unsaturated hydrocarbons generally have good combustion characteristics, but their reactivity can lead to instability in storage and sometimes to environmental emission problems.

Types of crude oil
The above description of hydrocarbons refers to simpler members of each family, but crude oils are actually complex mixtures of very long-chain compounds, some of which have not yet been identified. Because such complex mixtures cannot be readily identified by chemical composition, refiners customarily characterize crude oils by the type of hydrocarbon compound that is most prevalent in them: paraffins, naphthenes, and aromatics. Some crude oils, such as those in the original Pennsylvanian oil fields, consist mainly of paraffins. Others, such as the heavy Mexican and Venezuelan crudes, are predominantly naphthenic and are rich in bitumen (a high-boiling semisolid material).

crude oils
crude oilsProduct content of five major crude oils.
The proportions of products that may be obtained by distillation of five typical crude oils, ranging from heavy Venezuelan Boscan to the light Bass Strait oil produced in Australia, are shown in the figure. Given the pattern of modern demand (which tends to be highest for transportation fuels such as gasoline), the market price of a crude oil generally rises with increasing yields of light products. It is possible to process heavier crudes more intensely in order to improve their yield of light products, but the capital and operating costs required to support such high conversion processes are much greater than those required to process lighter crudes into the same yield of products.

In addition to the hydrocarbons, compounds of sulfur, nitrogen, and oxygen are present in small amounts in crude oils. Also there are usually traces of vanadium, nickel, chlorine, sodium, and arsenic. These elements may affect the safety of oil-transport systems, the quality of refined products, and the effectiveness of processing units within a refinery. Minute traces can usually be tolerated, but crudes with larger amounts of these materials must be extensively treated in order to restrict their harmful effects.

Conventional measurement systems
Petroleum refining is a continuous manufacturing process that is highly dependent on careful measurement of operating variables to influence product qualities and to control operating expenses. The conventional practice for the industry in the United States is to measure capacity by volume and to employ the English system for other operating measurements. Most refiners in other areas of the world define capacity by the weight of materials processed and record operating measurements in metric units. Since many refiners throughout the world have U.S. shareholders, international results are often reported on both bases, which are shown in the table. In this article, all measurements will be presented in international terms with the U.S. equivalent indicated in parentheses.

Measurement systems employed in petroleum refining
refinery operation	units of measure
international	U.S.
quantity processed	metric tons	barrels (42 gallons per barrel)
unit capacity	tons per year	barrels per day
flow rate	cubic metres per day	barrels per day
temperature	degrees Celsius	degrees Fahrenheit
pressure	pascals or bars	pounds per square inch
heat energy	joules or calories	British thermal units
Basic refinery processes
Each refinery is uniquely designed to process specific crude oils into selected products. In order to meet the business objectives of the refinery, the process designer selects from an array of basic processing units. In general, these units perform one of three functions: (1) separating the many types of hydrocarbon present in crude oils into fractions of more closely related properties, (2) chemically converting the separated hydrocarbons into more desirable reaction products, and (3) purifying the products of unwanted elements and compounds.

Separation
Fractional distillation
The primary process for separating the hydrocarbon components of crude oil is fractional distillation. Crude oil distillers separate crude oil into fractions for subsequent processing in such units as catalytic reformers, cracking units, alkylation units, or cokers. In turn, each of these more complex processing units also incorporates a fractional distillation tower to separate its own reaction products.

Modern crude oil distillation units operate continuously over long periods of time and are much larger than the fractional distillation units employed in chemical or other industries. Process rates are commonly delineated in American barrels; units capable of processing 100,000 barrels per day are commonplace, and the largest units are capable of charging more than 200,000 barrels per day.

Crude-oil fractional distillation column diagram
Crude-oil fractional distillation column diagramSchematic diagram of a crude-oil fractional distillation column.
The principles of operation of a modern crude oil distillation unit are shown in the figure. Crude oil is withdrawn from storage tanks at ambient temperature and pumped at a constant rate through a series of heat exchangers in order to reach a temperature of about 120 °C (250 °F). A controlled amount of fresh water is introduced, and the mixture is pumped into a desalting drum, where it passes through an electric field and a saltwater phase is separated. (If the salt were not removed at this stage, it would be deposited later on the tubes of the furnace and cause plugging.) The desalted crude oil passes through additional heat exchangers and then through steel alloy tubes in a furnace. There it is heated to a temperature between 315 and 400 °C (600 and 750 °F), depending on the type of crude oil and the end products desired. A mixture of vapour and unvaporized oil passes from the furnace into the fractionating column, a vertical cylindrical tower as much as 45 metres (150 feet) high containing 20 to 40 fractionating trays spaced at regular intervals. The most common fractionating trays are of the sieve or valve type. Sieve trays are simple perforated plates with small holes about 5 to 6 mm (0.2 to 0.25 inch) in diameter. Valve trays are similar, except the perforations are covered by small metal disks that restrict the flow through the perforations under certain process conditions.

The oil vapours rise up through the column and are condensed to a liquid in a water- or air-cooled condenser at the top of the tower. A small amount of gas remains uncondensed and is piped into the refinery fuel-gas system. A pressure control valve on the fuel-gas line maintains fractionating column pressure at the desired figure, usually near one standard atmosphere pressure, measured as approximately 1 bar, 100 kilopascals (KPa), or 15 pounds per square inch (psi). Part of the condensed liquid, called reflux, is pumped back into the top of the column and descends from tray to tray, contacting rising vapours as they pass through the slots in the trays. The liquid progressively absorbs heavier constituents from the vapour and, in turn, gives up lighter constituents to the vapour phase. Condensation and reevaporation takes place on each tray. Eventually an equilibrium is reached in which there is a continual gradation of temperature and oil properties throughout the column, with the lightest constituents on the top tray and the heaviest on the bottom. The use of reflux and vapour-liquid contacting trays distinguishes fractional distillation from simple distillation columns.

Intermediate products, or “sidestreams,” are withdrawn at several points from the column, as shown in the figure. In addition, modern crude distillation units employ intermediate reflux streams. Sidestreams are known as intermediate products because they have properties between those of the top or overhead product and those of products issuing from the base of the column. Typical boiling ranges for various streams are as follows: light straight-run naphtha (overhead), 20–95 °C (70–200 °F); heavy naphtha (top sidestream), 90–165 °C (195– 330 °F); crude kerosene (second sidestream), 150–245 °C (300–475 °F); light gas oil (third sidestream), 215–315 °C (420–600 °F).

Unvaporized oil entering the column flows downward over a similar set of trays in the lower part of the column, called stripping trays, which act to remove any light constituents remaining in the liquid. Steam is injected into the bottom of the column in order to reduce the partial pressure of the hydrocarbons and assist in the separation. Typically a single sidestream is withdrawn from the stripping section: heavy gas oil, with a boiling range of 285–370 °C (545–700 °F). The residue that passes from the bottom of the column is suitable for blending into industrial fuels. Alternately, it may be further distilled under vacuum conditions to yield quantities of distilled oils for manufacture into lubricating oils or for use as a feedstock in a gas oil cracking process.