BBC Homepage
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Sign in
Home
News
Sport
Business
Technology
Health
Culture
More menu
Search BBC
BBC Sport
Home
Football
Cricket
Formula 1
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Cycling
Athletics
More
Middlesex
Scores & Fixtures
Tables
Counties
Advertisement

Gatting leads group asking Middlesex chair to resign
Mike Gatting, wearing a shirt and tie
Image source,Getty Images
Image caption,
Mike Gatting played for Middlesex between 1975 and 1998

ByMatthew Henry
BBC Sport Journalist
Published
23 minutes ago
Former England captain Mike Gatting and a group of high-profile former Middlesex players have written to members after calling on the club's chair to resign, saying the club has been "poorly led for too long".

Gatting and former England and Middlesex players Mark Ramprakash, Mike Selvey, John Emburey and Clive Radley, plus West Indies legend Desmond Haynes, say chair Richard Sykes has rejected calls to commit to standing down.

Middlesex begin their campaign in Division Two of the County Championship against Gloucestershire at Lord's on Friday. The 11-time county champions have been in the second tier in five of the past six full seasons.

"As former players of Middlesex, we have become increasingly disturbed at the way the club has been allowed to sink to its current level," the letter says.

"The players are a product of their environment and in areas where the standard of coaching has been poor, the players have not been sufficiently challenged resulting in inadequate standards becoming the norm, insufficient to compete at the level to which we should aspire."

England players do not play enough county cricket - Lehmann
Published
1 day ago
Campbell backs status quo to work for Durham
Published
19 hours ago
Will captaincy reopen England door for Robinson?
Published
23 hours ago
Middlesex declined to respond formally when approached by BBC Sport but are open to meeting with the group.

They will begin the new campaign under a new coach after former New Zealand batter Peter Fulton was appointed in February.

Richard Johnson left last June after a run of poor results and Dane Vilas had been in interim charge since.

The letter comes at a tumultuous time for the Lord's-based club - and follows financial issues at Sussex and a reported revolt by former players at Lancashire, external.

As part of a view to securing private investment, Middlesex are looking into moving away from their current home where they have been long-standing tenants of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) for 160 years.

Though they have made recorded profits since, they were fined for breaches of financial regulations in 2023 amid financial struggles.

Chief executive Andrew Cornish is currently on a leave of absence, external amid an investigation being carried out by the Cricket Regulator. The absence of a CEO makes decision-making at board level difficult.

In the letter, the former Middlesex players are critical of the fact only one member of the club's board, former England bowler Steven Finn who joined in 2024, has playing experience in first-class cricket. It is understood no other players have applied in recent years.

Radley, Emburey, Selvey and Ramprakash have all had stints as Middlesex president since 2013. Gatting was on the club's board until recently.

They have called on the club's members to attend this month's Annual General Meeting "in numbers" to "seek answers".

Middlesex committed to a governance review at a recent members' forum.

"Middlesex was once a byword for excellence in the game, a club with a proud history of success and a strong, competitive culture brought about by hard work on and off the pitch," the letter said.

"Instead, around the counties the men's teams now are variously regarded as 'a soft touch' and 'lacking fight'.

"Middlesex is first and foremost a cricket club, but the leadership lacks any real cricketing knowledge.

"From a grassroots perspective, we've been promised many times that there are good, young players coming through.

"Yet despite having a catchment area that is perhaps the most populous and diverse in the country, the club is consistently failing to convert this talent in the way that other counties, often with less resource, have been able."

Related topics
Middlesex
County Cricket
Cricket

Top stories
Ghana sack manager Addo, 72 days before World Cup
Published
3 hours ago
Live. Wiegman to name England squad before World Cup qualifiers
536 viewing536 viewing
Newcastle not looking to make Howe change at moment - CEO
Published
2 hours ago
Advertisement

Elsewhere on the BBC
Ruth Jones as the late Carry On actress Hattie Jacques

Hattie
Tim Peake's quick update ahead of Artemis II's launch


A gruelling final battle for the Gladiators Champion 2026 title

Gladiators
Searching for answers decades on from an unsolved death

Assume Nothing: What Happened to Mary Glasgow?
Elsewhere in Sport
Is Verstappen's threat to quit a lever to alter rules? - F1 Q&A
Max Verstappen wearing a white fireproof top in the Red Bull garage at the Japanese Grand Prix
Why Sky's TV picks are causing a massive headache for match-going fans
A television camera during the Premier League match between Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers
Why innovative Canadian league is trialling daylight offside rule
Scoreboard showing a VAR check for offside
Spurs have addressed their Tudor error - but cannot afford another
Igor Tudor
Shades of Gascoigne - the rise of England's Anderson
Elliot Anderson celebrates scoring for Nottingham Forest against Man City
What can F1's bosses do to help keep Verstappen in the sport?
Max Verstappen removes his ear protectors after getting out of his car following the Japanese Grand Prix
Another crash, another bleary-eyed mugshot - what now for Woods?
Tiger Woods mugshot
BBC Sport experts choose England World Cup XIs - who would you pick?
A blue and red graphic overlaid with Lewis Hall, Jude Bellingham and Reece James in white England shirts
Unbeaten Itauma knocks out Franklin. VideoUnbeaten Itauma knocks out Franklin
Moses Itauma vs Jermaine Franklin
Why are Scotland playing Ivory Coast in Liverpool?
Scotland's Scott McTominay and Lewis Ferguson, Hill Dickinson Stadium and Ivory Coast's Amad Diallo
Were England players really 'playing for themselves' against Uruguay?
Thomas Tuchel
Mary Rand - the trailblazing Olympic champion
Mary Rand poses in front of a sign saying Mary
The remarkable return of Roy Hodgson aged 78
Roy Hodgson smiles
Does Chukwuemeka show the demise of the 90-minute player?
Carney Chukwuemeka of Chelsea in action during the Carabao Cup Third Round match between Chelsea and Barrow
'Kicked to the kerb' - is boxing failing its heroes?
A split picture of Terry Spinks, Jimmy Review and Ricky Hatton during their boxing careers
Fabregas, film stars and Disney: How Como are disrupting Italian football. VideoFabregas, film stars and Disney: How Como are disrupting Italian football
Cesc Fabregas, Como 1907 FC
Home
News
Sport
Business
Technology
Health
Culture
Arts
Travel
Earth
Audio
Video
Live
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
BBC emails for you
Advertise with us
Do not share or sell my info
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.